Looking at plans
When Marina's ideas arrived they were interesting.
A quote from some of the text.
The idea of the house is that it looks like a cave.
The ground floor is very dark.
The external walls are from stones and the additional parts that contain the kitchen, bathroom and the bed
are built in with concrete walls in organic form.
The sliding doors covering these can be painted and hung with canvases like a gallery.
A curved wooden staircase was shown up to the first floor
with the wall beside it containing many little niches with hidden lights.
Leading out of the cave up to a more natural light upstairs there would be a studio workroom.
There are also some very clever ideas picking up on our brief of multifunctional use
and inspirations that we discussed from caravan or boat interiors with folding tables and benches.
Her stairs were shown as a curving staircase
and she was also proposing the ground floor to have some living room features as well as serving as a kitchen.
We concluded that our own ideas had been relatively safe and angular in design.
We couldn't wait to see what Manos had come up with.
In the event it was several weeks after the deadline that he himself had chosen
that the first set of ideas from Manos arrived.
But they were worth the wait.
The plan itself was a single sheet of paper with a floor plan and elevation sketched as little coloured drawings.
The notation was so small on the original A4 that we could only read it after I'd enlarged it on our printer.
The plan also contained a series of messages to us.
I have elaborated a lot of other solutions but all seem to me very artificial, boxy, claustrophobic.
This one is probably the only one with Manos' full open plan room with light and social area.
So colours and materials, white stone as you indicated for the floor, eventually,
visible iron beams for ceiling, rusted, niches in stone and pointed.
Rest of the walls pressed plaster plus old wooden planks and a lot of glass, plexiglass and colour.
All the niches are invisible, pointed stone.
All niches have interior lights. Any shelves are glass or plexiglass.
Some can be coloured.
The plan itself showed a wet room to the right of the front door with a staircase over which started at the back wall
and turned 90 degrees to climb over the wet room.
The bottom half of the stairs before it turned were behind a floor to ceiling glass slate.
There were niches on the other three walls.
The left hand side of the room was split between storage and seating at the back
with a kitchen area near the new window on the front wall.
A glass or stone slab was drawn as a curved work surface which split the room and had stools underneath.
A new small window was drawn in on the front wall to ventilate and light the wet room.
A lot seemed to have been fitted in but we liked a number of the ideas
and it seemed to make sense to have a ground floor social area as long as there was enough room.
We were so excited that we overlooked the lack of plan for the first floor.
This was to follow a while later.
In the meantime we sent some comments on the plan.
This was the way we worked through the project as a dialogue.
Sometimes it felt we were in tune with each other.
At other times there was a lot more work required to involve a joint solution.
Our first comments on the ground floor were
We like very much the design for the kitchen area with a separate social seating and breakfast bar.
We like it but we will need to ensure that sufficient storage and space for a fridge, microwave, oven combination etc.
Perhaps this could be combined with Marina's idea for an occasional bed.
This seems a good position and divides the bathroom from the kitchen social area.
We like the glass wall slate to the top idea.
We wondered if Marina's myriad of lit niches could be incorporated upstairs to light the way.
This could be gorgeous.
The position on this wall is a good solution.
Separate from kitchen living, more space freed up, more privacy, light and ventilation is possible here.
Marina drew in a double door which seemed good and space saving but it looked like a traditional design too.
Any thoughts about the back wall niche as a gash of light and whether glass bricks are an option for this here or upstairs?
Upstairs, we've already sent some of our ideas but we're still unsure of the best position for access to the roof terrace.
This will decide the stairs position.
We've sent a picture of clever slide out stairs that we found.
Could this perhaps be possible?
Marina's positioning of the stairs in the lower part of the ceiling makes some sense.
We see the first floor as lighter, able to get some air in through the French doors, small balcony and roof access.
The purpose of the room, sleeping, sitting, entertaining, studying storage, all quite a challenge.
We think it's going to be really good and we're very excited about the whole project.
We had some further conversation and after some thought we sent more comments.
We have some views on the overall colour scheme.
We really like the tiny details you added to the house in Kritsa using coloured tiles.
We don't want to restrict your palette but would like something similar using plain etched textured patterned glass.
Using occasional details in textured translucent or metallic mosaic tiles in natural neutral white cream light or dark grey.
In elks or shell stone rather than bright colours.
This is because we like to change the colours in our home.
If a definite colour is used on a fixed object, say the work surface or floor or tile surfaces, we're likely to get bored with it and we want to change it.
Also, a more neutral palette gives us more options for adding a wider range of colour.
We can add colour with furnishing fabric, household objects, lights, ornaments or accessories.
These can be changed as and when we want to.
But to create the interest in more permanent features by limiting colour but interest in textures and finishes.
We're not asking for bland but this will give you loads of scope to create something beautiful.
So that floor surfaces, shelves, glass, work tops and tiling will be light.
Neutral colours and accessories using brighter colours can be changed when required against the neutral backdrop of the house.
Finishes.
Although much of the house will have a modern look with glass, modern materials and lighting.
We talked of using some old wood from the house, perhaps as cupboard doors to use some of the previous history of the house.
This could be stained or colour washed or varnished over bleached paint.
Light and power.
This needs to be sufficient and flexible for living, working and to zone areas.
For example, the kitchen ground floor social area where feasible, energy efficient, low wattage or LEDs should be used.
Ground floor.
One of Marina's plans showed a double front door which would be space saving within the thickness of the exterior walls.
The new high level window for the bathroom could be constructed to include a shelf and some other storage is needed in the bathroom, perhaps in a niche or under the sink.
Ground floor windows.
Privacy should be maintained by use of mirrored glass.
Kitchen work surface.
Sufficient overhang should exist to avoid any diagonal lines being visible from appliances or storage below.
The new metallic pole to support the glass staircase could be utilised to clamp on an organic shaped curved tabletop that could be raised up to the ceiling and incorporated in 12 volts step down powered lighting unit.
The social seating area could be cut back on the right hand side to give clearer access and be level with the staircase glass.
The storage under this seating would be most useful.
Back wall niche to incorporate a row of glass bricks.
First floor.
Lint niches on the right hand side wall up the stairs.
In the front wall a long cupboard niche to be created with doors for storage, doors in recovered wood.
A full glass top to roof shelves to be created out of glass, not coloured.
Back wall wardrobe storage to include drop down work surfaces for use at sitting height as desks.
Two double sockets within each at work surface level.
Bed sofa to be either board or constructed and will be against the front or left hand side wall leaving a clear view of the glass stairwell.
Sun terrace.
Sink for washing with tap on the top sun terrace could be on the floor in the top right hand corner.
Windows into the first floor room from the sun terrace.
The plan for the first floor when it arrived echoed some of the features of the ground floor plans.
Stone wall niches with lights, the use of structural iron bars and glass.
The most interesting feature was a proposal for a glass panel to the ground floor below a spiral staircase attached to a metal pole that went down through the building to the back on the left hand side of the ground floor seating area.
The spiral would go up to the new roof terrace.
The spiral staircase was described as a light well topped by a glass roof hatch.
This would bring light down through the building.
One night a short time later my mobile rang.
Hello, are you at home?
Yes.
Why?
It was Manos.
I'll be sending you a fax.
I've changed the plans.
New ideas.
You will see.
Ring me when it arrives.
I hope you like it and we will talk later.
Cooking the evening meal was put on hold.
The inbox was scanned for fax notification and after a short wrestle with the laptop a four page fax was printed out.
New ideas certainly.
The roof terrace would have a glass floor to go with the glass hatch and a glass spiral staircase.
Further closer examination of the plans revealed a partial glass floor in the first floor room as well.
The plan was annotated to bring light to the ground floor.
The spiral stairs had been moved to a different corner of the building but it made more sense there.
It would be amazing but was there a sudden glut of plate glass in Crete?
It would certainly be light but would heat be a problem?
It was to be discussed.
We call back.
We love it.
Good.
But you need to think about it and the colour.
Here's a website link.
You will see examples there with glass blocks that can be used on the terrace walls.
The colours could be interesting.
Let me know what you think of the colours.
We are now blocked until you speak to me.
We will proceed with other parts of the plan.
The niches etc.
Now, do you know about kumquats?
We answered yes.
Nervously.
Why?
Can you make marmalade or confiture with kumquats?
I have many of them outside my window.
The conversation was taking a Cretan turn.
There was much to consider even before the question of kumquat chutney.
We eventually recommended using a bottling of the surplus.
Perhaps in Brandew or Metaxa.
Have you tried this?
Well no.
We don't exactly get snowed under with kumquats in Sussex.
Or Metaxa come to that.
We have talked enough.
The phone went dead.
Still it felt like progress of sorts.
The next spring visit.
The first visit of this year was an opportunity to stay in a house that had already been renovated.
Impressively, this was the one we'd visited by torchlight only six months previously.
We arranged to meet with Manos in a cafe near the office in the port.
After a daytime flight, we found ourselves in the cafe above the new marina.
Enjoying a very welcome cooling drink.
He arrived late and flustered and welcomed us with a flurry of sorrys and bristly double cheek kiss each.
Oh, it's been hectic in the office today.
Less hectic, I quietly and unkindly thought to myself now that you're here with us and not still there.
We had some more drinks and after Manos had relaxed and briefly discussed some of his plans for our house,
it was agreed we would follow him in our hire car up to the renovated house in the hills.
It was just as well that we did.
We'd previously been driven there in the dark and I doubt that I would have found it again in the rabbit warren of streets and alleyways.
Eventually we drove up at the side of a large storm drain
and after parking the cars crossed over into the track.
To our right at the end of a small street was a smart new green stained wooden door
set in a newly pointed stone wall with a newly plastered wall over it.
This is the house, come in said Manos unlocking the door.
We'd only seen the house once before the renovation works in the dark by torchlight.
There'd been a transformation, the inside was bright and airy, a mix of plastered and original stone walls,
there were lots of modern lights, a fitted kitchen and interesting objects and furniture.
Manos opened the fridge and took out a bottle of wine and opening it said,
please make yourself at home here, use the food and drink, they are for you
and let me know of anything that's missing for comfortable living.
You are the first people to stay here,
it will be useful to you in finalising the detailed plans for your house.
We looked around with him, it was such a transformation and the layout was so interesting.
On the ground floor was one long room with a glass door at each end,
screened by a translucent curtain.
At one end there was a comfortable sitting area with a large coloured sofa bed next to a coffee table
and a corner fireplace with a plastered chimney up to the ceiling.
The other end of the room was a fitted kitchen with all the necessary appliances
as well as a small dining table cleverly fitted into an alcove.
A vertical slice of glass gave a glimpse of a small desk and a storage area below the stairs.
These were off to the left of the main room and ran up past a beautifully exposed stone wall.
There was only one room on the first floor, the bedroom,
but there was a useful fitted wardrobe,
interesting small windows with shutters in green stained wood to match the front door
and best of all a door out onto a large roof terrace.
This was a great space with plenty of stone seating,
places to lie down, a dining table under a shady pergola made of old olive wood and thick canes for the roof.
There was also a tap and a large old stone sink next to a barbecue area.
There were views over the village, neighbouring gardens, the olive groves and the mountains,
even a glimpse in the distance of the sea.
We thought it was perfect and told Manos so.
He was sitably modest and said it was a rushed job, achieved cheaply.
We were not entirely convinced, there seemed good quality fittings
and the attention to detail in the finish, but we found this reassuring.
The house lacked for nothing in terms of amenities.
There were two air conditioning units, a power shower, oven, hob, washing machine, satellite TV, DVD and stereo.
A real home from home with better weather.
We were very impressed and grateful to Manos.
Our frustration at the slow start for our house evaporated, at least for the time being.